---
title: "Comparison of Machine Learning Approaches for Tsunami Forecasting
from Sparse Observations"
excerpt: "We present several different methods for predicting tsunami wave height from GeoClaw runs. "
header:
  image: assets/images/tsunamis/gauge_locs.png
  teaser: assets/images/tsunamis/gauge_locs.png
sidebar:
  - title: "Journal"
    image: /assets/images/doe.png
    image_alt: "logo"
    text: "Pure and Applied Geophysics"
gallery:
  - url: assets/images/tsunamis/realization1012.png
    image_path: assets/images/tsunamis/realization1012.png
    alt: "Forecasting window for prediction. "

---



This was a project that I worked on with Christopher Liu, [Donsub Rim](https://dsrim.github.io/), and [Randall LeVeque](https://faculty.washington.edu/rjl/).
We attempt to predict maximum wave height, as well as full waveform, with several standard ML models.
These are trained on GeoClaw runs.
It has been accepted and set to appear in in Pure and Applied Geophysics as of July 2021, and preliminary ArXiv copy can be found [here](https://eartharxiv.org/repository/view/2267/).


We have explored various different machine learning (ML) approaches for
forecasting tsunami amplitudes
% (or full time series)
at a set of forecast
points, based on hypothetical short-time observations at one or more
observation points. As a case study, we chose an observation point near the
entrance of the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and two forecast points in the Salish
Sea, one in Discovery Bay and the other in Admiralty Inlet, the waterway
leading to southern Puget Sound. One ML approach considered is to train a
support vector machine (SVM) to predict the maximum amplitude at the forecast
points. We also explored the use of two deep convolutional neural networks, a
denoising autoencoder (DAE) and a variational autoencoder (VAE) to predict the
full time series at the forecast points. These latter approaches also provide
an estimate of the uncertainty in the predictions. As training data we use a
subset of the 1300 synthetic CSZ earthquakes generated in the work of Melgar et
al. 2016,
reserving some as test data. As additional tests, the trained ML models have
also been applied to other hypothetical CSZ earthquakes produced by very
different approaches, such as the ``L1 event'' from the work of Witter et al.
2013 that is used in the generation of tsunami inundation
maps in Washington State. The ML models are capable of providing very good
predictions from short duration observations, even when truncated before the
first wave peak has reached the observation point.

{% include gallery caption="The picture that describes how much time we show the model, and what we are predicting. " %}